ladies and gentlemen please welcome
carbon technology manager David Wright
[Applause]
welcome everybody
I just wanted to see how many stayed
because this is the first time this hall
has competition with other sessions all
right
as you can tell we are so ready for all
of you to bring your applications to Mac
OS 10 by carbonizing them and this
session is the kickoff for that so I
want to just bring Scott Forstall up
he's the director of application
frameworks in Apple software engineering
group please welcome Scott Forstall all
right they've already learned about
carbon so come on everyone ready to
learn about Charmin you've been drinking
heavy okay a couple years ago we came up
with this carbon strategy and we were
incredibly excited about it and we gave
you the direction but it was a little
bit fuzzy the strategy made sense and
you all told us that but some of the
details weren't quite there yet
we needed to fill in exactly what were
the carbon api's we certainly needed to
fill in the implementation until last
year we took carbon and we brought it
into sharp focus and no I did not name
my daughter carbon as tempting as that
may have been to me it wasn't tempting
to my wife so last year we really filled
out the details of carbon we gave you a
complete carbon spec we gave you a lot
of tools that helped with carbonization
we gave you this thing called the carbon
dater that you've heard about which is
an amazing thing the tool creates custom
documentation to tell you how you can
carbonize your application so over the
last year it's been really exciting for
me and the carbon effort to watch how
many of you have started taking
advantage of carbon it's been fabulous
every you know every few days every week
I see a new carbon application appear
but I know some of you last year you
looked up and you said I like carbon I
like the direction I like the strategy
the details make sense but it looks a
little bit fragile now can't even hold
head up by itself right and so you
waited a little bit well over the last
year carbon has matured a ton and carbon
is now ready
it is not fragile anymore and this year
it's time for all of us and all of you
to dig in and I've been working all the
time so I have to work in pictures of
her so I know what she looks like it's
it's time for you not to worry about
being being dirty getting your hands
dirty getting your face dirty you've got
to dig in it's time to really get
started with carbon so let's do that at
the end of this hour of bliss I could
pull the junior high trick a junior high
school trick of you know having a pop
quiz right telling you close your books
but ma near the desk those frightening
words and I'd have five simple questions
on this quiz and it'd be easy because
I'm going to tell you the answers right
now so the questions would be first of
all what are the user benefits of carbon
so when we went and design carbon we did
it with the user in mind with a laser we
looked at how can we better benefit the
user next you know what exactly is
carbon right so you've heard about the
benefits you put a lot about carbon but
what exactly makes up carbon we want to
keep the user happy and of course you
know you're all our friends we want to
keep you happy as well so what are the
developer benefits how do you build a
great carbon application now how do you
just build a carbon application but how
can you go that step beyond and get a
great carbon application and last when
should you carbon I've all right let's
dig in
two years ago when we came up with a
carbon strategy I had this dream and to
this day I still think this dream best
illustrates the user benefits of carbon
so I've been thinking a lot about this
dream recently and I had it again a
little updated version so sit back and
psychoanalyze me as I tell you my carbon
dream or my Mac os10 dream so here's how
the dream goes Apple is throwing this
huge party it's the Mac os10 party and
outside this part is a big sign and it
says no Mac os10 all of your apps are
invited an app start arriving at this
party now the first group to come are
these cocoa folks because the cocoa
folks they're pretty hip to the whole
Mac os10 idea they're old friends with
maque that came into the party and they
they said they came in through the 20th
floor and they're dynamic launch they're
walking around the party they're
enjoying themselves they're gonna
throwing messages at each other and
they're having a good time
the second group that came was a little
strange it was just this big cluster
this like a rugby scrum and they're all
like attach the hip and they walked in
together I couldn't separate from each
other it was a bunch of old friends in
there I mean we recognize everyone
there's all these old friends but you
know they're sitting there partying and
they're drinking and they're having fun
and one guy in the middle he drinks way
too much boom falls in his face and the
entire group boom falls in our face
turns out I just look at that I said yo
that that's classic
and that's what that was that's the
classic app there are always old friends
and they're invited to the party but
even at the Mac os10 party there no more
stable there no more independent and
they were before they're all there stuck
together at the hips the next group that
came in they came one and and they came
running up to the door and they ran in
and they said hey you know I'm John okay
hey I'm Java - hi I'm Jonathan hey I'm
John - and they ran across the room and
they ran they grabbed a beer you know
they they claimed they run everywhere
and the last group to come with these
real hipsters and these were the carbon
apps they came up and you know they were
old friends but they look slightly
different like they're aware nicer
clothes their posture was a little bit
better
they'll talked about you know just this
little surgery they'd had a little while
ago where they've been separated from
that other group they were still friends
with those guys but they were separated
and there were individuals and they
weren't tied to others and in fact
however some real cows in this group a
cash cow and these cash cows they looked
as healthy as possible so that's what
we're doing with Mac os10
we're throwing a party and it's the Mac
os10 party and all of your apps are
invited but if you have a classic app
you really want to make it an individual
and break it off and make it into a
carbon out all right done with
psychoanalysis
what does it mean when we looked at
building carbon and Mac os10 there were
three main user benefits that we were
shooting for first stability
we'd like a more stable platform with
more stable applications next
performance and responsiveness so we
want the app we with the whole system to
perform incredibly well we want it to be
fast we want applications to respond to
you and third we really want to improve
user experience let's start with
stability
stability comes in the form of protected
memory so on Mac OS 9 there's a single
address space and all of your
applications run within this single
address space now the weird thing is you
sort of run on the honor system for Mac
OS 9 right you you promise you're not
going to write over other applications
memory turns out most apps are honorable
some on the back aren't and when those
aren't honorable those are the ones that
drink too much aren't responsible they
fall down pull the entire system down
now we want those apps to still run on
ten and so what we've done is we've slid
Darwin in underneath the Mac OS system
and then those apps run in the classic
environment but they still run within a
single address space for all of those
applications next we have carbon
applications Java and cocoa all of these
gets their own address space so each
carbon application carbon app cases the
party they're not affected by each other
they live as individuals and aren't
affected with the memory space of other
applications so let's go ahead and demo
this for you this morning Steve and his
keynote showed a bomb app we bring this
machine up and in his ball map it was a
carbon bomb app and this is a beautiful
application and the de-spawn map its
whole goal is to write all over memory
and take down other applications so he
did it as a carbon application when that
carbon application ran it just crashed
itself what we've done here is we have a
classic bomb app so that bomb app is
running in the classic environment and
when it runs it's going to try to write
all over memory of course it's allowed
to do that this is the drunk of the
party and he's going to take down other
applications now what you can see is on
the left hand side we have a couple
applications QuickTime and TextEdit or
something and they're running as Carbon
applications as modern applications
on the other side we have two apps that
are classic applications go ahead and
light the bomb boom all the classic apps
go away the carbon apps Coco apps Java
apps are still running the question is
where do you want to run your browser
where do you run it want to run your
fetch where do you want to run your
applications you want to run them on the
side it's not going to go away thanks
Dave so the next thing we looked at is
improving the performance and
responsiveness of the system so there's
a bunch of ways of doing that the main
thing we get is with pre-emptive
scheduling so what does that mean the OS
on Mac OS 10 will preemptively schedule
different tasks which means it'll
actually choose to give a little bit of
time to one app a little bit of time to
another a little bit of time to another
and it'll be fair about this all right
this isn't like Lord of the Flies where
you know you have to have the conch to
speak and you have to give it up to let
someone else speak the OS steals the
conch and gives it to the next person so
it allows things to preemptively
schedule against each other
what that means is if one task is taking
you know a ton of CPU and it's just
trying to hog it it doesn't matter the
OS will still give other tasks some time
so the user interface will be more live
one application can't stop another
applications UI from responding now it
turns out this also improves stability
why is that well if you get a
ill-behaved application which just
starts spinning and spinning and
spinning on necklace nine right now that
could hang the whole system right the
system feels like it's hung because that
application isn't giving up time to
anything else on Mac OS 10 the OS will
still time slice between it and other
applications
so other applications will still get
time to do so we also with Carvin wanted
to make the entire system PowerPC
native so we took anything that was 68k
we wrote rewrote it and everything now
is PowerPC native so last we really
wanted to improve the user experience we
really wanted to rededicate ourselves to
creating a world-class user experience
now I'm not just thing I'm saying user
experience because we care about the
user interface right we care about the
elegance and the cleanliness and the
imagery but we also care about the
behaviors what does it feel like to use
this this whole system so the first
thing we did is we proved improve
stability and performance right if your
system stays up longer if your
applications don't crash then you have a
better user experience we could have
stopped there next we got rid of sticks
I heat so virtual memory is always on
now what does that mean
you know this panel who loves this panel
ok who wants this panel to die all right
said you never again have to explain to
someone and your user documentation go
to the app and not the link go to the
application do get info on it go to the
memory part of that and set a number
which makes sense you know what makes
sense for a user on how much memory they
should use they have say 64 Meg of RAM
they want to use 64 mega Ram they have a
gig which is you know all you guys in
you want to use a gig this hit home for
me this weekend when I was working on
this presentation what's it this morning
I kept on getting this panel over and
over PowerPoint was telling me there's
not enough memory it's not enough memory
and so I'd increased the partition and
then it worked fine for a while and then
I'd add some images with my daughter and
then suddenly what tell me there's not
enough net memory again again gone so
the last way we want to improve the user
experience is of course with aqua let's
talk through that
when the Mac was born years ago and now
I didn't name my daughter Mac either it
was it was an incredibly fresh-faced
right these are experienced the user
interface was great and everyone really
liked it and as the Mac has aged it's
remained a great user interface but you
know we looked at it recently and we
said as good as the user interface is
it's extremely hip still but it's
lightly dated maybe you know hip but
dated now don't get me wrong I mean it's
still light years ahead of the
competition competition so we thought we
could do better and I believe with aqua
we really have the amount of polish and
attention to detail and elegance in aqua
is extreme now as I said before you can
still run your classic app on top of Mac
OS 10 but your classic apps do not get
the aqua interface so they're going to
look slightly old right the plate within
the same system but they're going to
have the Platinum control so your users
will know whether or not you've gone to
the work to give them a stable polished
aqua app or you're just relying on the
classic experience all right those are
the user benefits that we are striving
for now what exactly is carbon so we
looked at the Mac OS there's a whole set
of API it's large set that makes up that
defines the Mac OS and a lot of these
api's are great and it's what you depend
on for your applications and we really
wanted to move those forward right our
goal isn't to force you to rewrite your
entire application in fact our goal was
quite the opposite but some of these
api's prevent progress so when we looked
at these api's we said we can really
split it you know in marketing terms
into the good in the bad
and the bad api's are the ones that
prevent protection so for instance low
memory Global's
right everyone writes wildly to low
memory Global's you can't do that in a
protected memory environment so we had
to get rid of those anything that
prevented preemption we had to get rid
of and any 68k specificity is so trap
manager or segment manager anything that
was 68k specific we had to remove that's
part of the bad API so carbon is the
good api's from the mac OS now carbon is
a living entity carbon is growing carbon
is not freeze-dried at some point in
time but we're adding on to it so for
instance we added on aqua so as we add
api's carbon over time will grow to
encompass those carbon is our vehicle
for adding those api's so where does
your app fit in here we've done a ton of
measurements we built all these tools we
built a lot of databases and we ran
application after application after
application through here thousands of
applications and what we found is an
application is typically about 95%
carbon compliance or carbon ready what
that means is 95% of the api's you're
calling our fully carbon supported so
there's no change for those but there is
you know a subset 5% of the api's that
are calling in to Global's that are
calling in to data structures that we've
hidden now and for those you have to do
a little bit of work to move your
application to be a hundred percent
carbon compliant and when you do that
then you'll have a full carbon
application we didn't go crazy here
right we didn't change the application
model we're not telling you you have to
start from scratch and rewrite your
entire application we didn't go create
an object-oriented Java API set if you
want a great object-oriented Java API
set go to Coco go to Java - right there
are java api on the platform what we
wanted to do here
take all the work you've invested in the
mac OS API and move it forward and let's
be honest here right
we're not automatic so you do have to do
work to get a carbon application you
have to recompile it's not binary
compatible if you want to be binary
compatible and run it in classic but you
don't get the advantages of Mac OS 10
all right so the user is happy now you
know what carbon is why are you going to
be happy so there's a bunch of developer
benefits that we've added into carbon as
well first we want to make sure that you
can truly move on to carbon without
giving up the installed base so we want
you to be able to sell it to both 9 and
10 I know that most of you are you know
lazy most of you work you know 168 hours
a week and we'd like you to work 80 so
we want to do most of the work for you
we want when you're carbonizing an
application when you're moving an
application forward that you do the work
that's specific to your application not
the system to work we'll do all the rest
we really wanted to design this with
future enhancements in mind
Carbon is a living entity we want to
advance it and it turns out that
developing a carbon will enhance
development productivity let's talk
through these so first where do you want
to run your application if you have a
carbon application and there's two main
platforms you care about and here I've
listed Mac OS 9 2 generically menial Mac
OS 8 1 8 6 Mac OS 8 and 9 and then Mac
OS 10 so it's obvious that you'll be
able to ship your carbon application on
Mac OS 10 because carbon is an intrinsic
piece of Mac OS 10 right one of the main
points of Mac OS 10 was to provide
carbon support so boom your applications
Mac OS 10 sits right there now Mac OS 9
has a lot of the api's that are part of
carbon but it doesn't have all of them
so what we've done is provided this thin
layer this fits in veneer which is
called carbon lib or the carbon library
the carbon library for most AP is just
calls directly into mac os9
because the API is there but where we've
added on AP is that are part of carbon
but weren't part of mac os9 or weren't
part of mac OS 8 6 those API s are
implemented in and part of the carbon
library so a mac os9 your application
runs on top of the carbon library so
next is we know you have a lot of code
it's based on the mac OS AP is what we
wanted to do with carbon is to preserve
your investment in these api's make it
easy for you to take advantage of new
features and quickly get on carbon and
we think we've done that in fact we've
asked a lot of you you know how hard do
you think it's been to carbonized those
of you who have worked on it and
consistently I've heard that's about the
same work as moving from 68k to PowerPC
for some of you who have really well
written code it's a lot easier just
moved right over for those of you who
have a lot of skeletons in the closet a
lot of cruft in your applications it's a
little bit harder the next thing we want
to do with carbon is design it for
future enhancements so as I said carbon
is this living and growing thing and in
the future we'd love to do more things
with it right we'd love to make it so
the toolbox is re-entrant so add more
threading support we'd also love to
advance improve features now I'm sure
this is happen to any of you but you
know I've heard before when a new
version of Mac OS has come out sometimes
some people's applications are doing
something they shouldn't have and the OS
breaks them a lot of that is because our
data structures are all open and you
guys love to get in there and dig and do
funny things right you learned this one
data structure if you twiddle the third
bit of the second field then you know
windows stay on top or something
instead of allowing you to manipulate
these things in sort of a random manner
with these open data structures in fact
we have to hide those data structures if
we want to make something re-entrant
because we can't count on when you're
going to touch that data structure if we
can't actually put a walk around it in
another thread so because of that we've
made most of the data structures opaque
right so you can't get directly at the
data structures instead we've added
accessors so semantic accessors that'll
get exactly the information you're
looking for
and then actually it turns out your code
reads a lot better because instead of
just changing some part of some
structure you're actually calling a
function that tells you what your
purpose was with the toolbox at that
point so we're really designing this so
when we come out with future versions of
Mac OS 10 and Carbon we can advance the
backend we can advance our
implementation and you'll get the
advantage without it affecting without
it damaging your application so
developer productivity now who here
wouldn't want to make your application
easier to develop what we found is when
people come to Mac OS 10 and two-carbon
they're finding it easier to develop the
application and a little bit faster so
why is this well first you don't crash
the machine when you're debugging it
right I worked on code before where
you're debugging it and you take down
the whole system
I mean OCO die inherited not mine and I
Mac os10 that doesn't happen right you
just take down the application you're
writing the one you're developing you
don't take down the whole system so the
debug find something fix it
and then go to the next bug cycle is
much faster it also helps you to find
your bugs on 10 so you know those
trickiest to find bugs are the memory
Snatchers right it's the random little
memory smasher where you wrote off to
some random place in memory and then
five minutes later the system starts
behaving somewhat strangely and you have
no idea why because
when you wrote into that memory space
and when your system or your application
or system crashed aren't immediate right
there's no causal connection that you
can see so what we are not go is 10 if
you write someplace random your app
crashes immediately you get a back trace
you find out hey I can't write to that
segment that's that's outside of my
memory space you can't write to know and
we've actually had a lot of developers
who have told us that you know they
couldn't find some bug and then they
pulled it over on carbon open five
minutes they'd found the bug actually
turns out that when we are carbonizing
some of our tool box code we found some
memory smashers that were on nine that
we didn't know about so there's no more
bugs in the tool box on nine all right
so that's the developer benefit now how
do you build a great carbon application
all right our goal here is not for you
just to build a carbon application but
really to build the best one you
possibly can the reason most of you are
here and can afford to attend a
conference and spend time and are
getting paid isn't because you built
some carbonate or some mac OS
application just an arbitrary mac OS
application it's because you built a
best-of-breed mac OS application right
you went above and beyond and you built
something so good that it's better than
the competition so when you look at
carbon you should think about it the
same way you shouldn't shoot just to
build some carbon application but you
should figure out how can you build the
best possible carbon application you can
so let's talk about that I'm going to go
through a hypothetical application here
right so this is not a real application
but just so we can talk about the
carbonization process talk about this
group of people and they did read neo
Kafka's the metamorphosis and so they
wrote an application called I metamorph
and I metamorph takes and
morph one image into another right the
same way that Kafka spoke a man turned
into a bug overnight so here's this
application and here's an example you
take you know a dirty kid and you
magically clean them up so you know that
that's our slogan that's our slogan for
a four-carbon right we we clean yep so
this application that takes and does
this processing has a lot of things that
needs to deal with when going to carbon
so what are those things well first of
all this company has a whole lot of code
right they have lots and lots of
different pieces of code and they have
to determine well what should they
carbonize right what should this caught
this Kafka enterprises this company what
should they carbonize they have
applications and nets and plugins and
device drivers and all sorts of things
so first they need to determine what
pieces of code are candidates for
carbonization so first of all the answer
is application applications are
absolutely candidates for carbonization
you should carbonize your applications
foreground and background so if you have
a faceless background application
absolutely you should carbonize that as
well
you should also carbonize plugins now
there's two pieces of technology in the
system that can really aid in this
process there's a technology called core
foundation and it's it's pretty low in
the architectural stack and core
foundation has something called CF
bundle and CF plug-in and both of these
will aid in your carbonization process
of plugins so you should check those out
now they shouldn't carbonize device
drivers by their very nature a device
driver is an OS specific piece of code
right it's dealing with the OS and how
the OS deals with devices so instead of
carbonizing those they should continue
on Mac OS 9 to do the same thing they
were before with device manager and I'm
Mac OS 10 you should look at i/o kit and
right an i/o kit driver which will
provide the functionality you want on 10
and lastly they shouldn't carbonize
their system in it there so it turns out
in its work counter to the goal of
increased stability now there are some
in it which by their nature are really
just faceless background applications
and so those should actually be
carbonized those should become Carbon
applications and run as faceless
background you know servers but they
shouldn't be carbonized as you know
something which patches the whole system
alright so how do you carbonize what's
the process so it turns out it's really
simple first since we've taken and made
all these data structures opaque you
have to go and work to adopt the
accessors and this is probably the bulk
of your work carbonizing your
application and the great part of it is
it's the easiest part of carbonizing
it's really a grunge work mundane sit in
your office from 1:00 p.m. when you get
into work till you know 6:00 a.m. the
next day for a couple days and you just
walk through compiler errors that's all
it is because the compiler is going to
tell you if you're accessing a data
structure which isn't there anymore so
the first part is go ahead and adopt all
the new access or functions the next
thing is to use the new toolbox upp s so
what is this we used to have generic
functions for creating upp s for
callbacks now we have more typesafe upp
s which are created per callback that
you care about so you have to go ahead
and instead of using the generic ones
use the more specific ones now if your
duck if your application opens or saves
files you want to use NAB services so go
ahead and adopt the NAB Services API s
and Apple help is now the way to provide
help for your up
patient okay so you do these four simple
things that's it right we're done
so I'm wasting your time here you could
have done that while I was talking
there's two really good talks that can
teach you more about how to carbonize
the first one is really transitioning
your application so what is the
carbonization process that one will go
through more of the exact steps you need
to take a lot more of the process and I
encourage you to go to that one and then
of course the navigation services talk
which will tell you about how to use nad
services but that's not it right you can
do you can do more and you really do you
really want to create the Best of Breed
Carbon application so I don't know about
you but you know when I watch some of
the demos that are coming out in carbon
I get pretty excited because I'm not
writing an application in the same feel
they are I mean they're they're looking
great okay so what what should you do
well if you look at if you look at this
I metamorph application I talked about
they do this big operation where they
take an image and then they morph it
into another image so there's a lot of
computation that goes on in that it
takes a while so what they're doing
before is they were using thread manager
right so they take and when you said
start them start morphing these images
it would take and it would throw this
into a thread manager thread so you
could continue working with the UI and
changing other things now turns out that
thread manager is cooperatively
scheduled so what that means is as a
threads doing work it is a separate
thread but every once in a while it has
to say okay I'm going to take a break
right coffee break now stop someone else
goes ahead does some work they come back
they take a coffee break you get to work
and you go back and forth and only once
working at a time but it's up to them to
decide when the other thread gets time
to work so the problem with that is if
you're working in this application and
this other threads doing a lot of
computation if it decides not to give
you time
then your UI feels a little stale it
freezes for a little bit it's jittery it
isn't the smooth experience that you
really want to have in a carbon
application on 10 now by the very nature
of the thread manager ap is on 10 we
can't make them preemptively scheduled
because you assume based on the
semantics of the AP is that it will be
cooperatively scheduled now what we've
done on 10 is of course there are the
multi processing API is which we have a
9 as well the MP API is the multi
processing API is on 10 are preemptively
scheduled against each other so the OS
itself will go between the threads and
time flies so no one gets starved out so
this I met a morph application instead
of sitting on thread manager and doing
cooperative scheduling it should go
ahead and move to the MP api's and do
pre-emptive scheduling now the way we've
implemented the MP AP is is on top of P
threads right P threads are the POSIX
threads and if you wanted to you could
go straight to POSIX threads and use the
POSIX threads directly the MTA API is
just a thin layer for an API you may
know that uses the P threads alright so
there's a session where you can learn a
lot more about the threading and also
shared memory and file systems and all
the lower architectural levels of carbon
now each year at this conference we get
feedback forms from you and you tell us
you want five full days of conference
right you say don't cheat us out don't
go to four and a half days we want five
days so our schedulers this year have
outdone themselves by taking one of the
more important sessions and scheduling
it in this room which I'm sure will be
packed at 5:00 p.m. on Friday ending at
6:30 so I expect it's be packed
all right the next technology you should
really take advantage of is carbon
events so carbon events is a way of
sending user actions and other events
throughout your application so carbon
events does a lot of things for you it
really improves your application the
first thing it will do is improve
performance so that said you should go
and take advantage of it because we want
to have applications running as fast as
possible on Mac OS 10 so the way it does
this is it sends events only when
they're necessary it it means you don't
have to turn pull constantly to see the
state of something so what does that
mean so a year ago when my wife and I
were due with this baby well well my
wife was due with the baby and I was
doing nothing the grandparents started
calling and they started calling once a
week and then they started calling once
a day and they started calling multiple
times a day and they were saying you had
she been boring it has to be born yet
you know that constantly Consular
pulling us over and over again and at
some point I said you know stop calling
I promise I will you know send you a
carbon event well not me not that geeky
I said you know I'll call you I promise
I'll call you when she's born right I
will send you an event I will call you
there's no reason for you to constantly
pull polling was not only you know
somewhat irritating it's tied up the
phone lines the phone was busy all the
time the same thing happens right now on
mac os9
when you start saying where's the mouse
where's the mouse where's the mouse
where's the mouse and the mouse you know
the Christians are sitting there right
you know where's Nelson it's sitting
there hasn't moved at all you're tying
up the whole CPU asking a question which
doesn't change each time you ask you so
what carbon events does is you sit back
you say hey now it's like that hey Mouse
but tell me when you move and so then
when the mouse moves it'll tell you to
move to another position you don't need
to tie up the CPU by pulling and asking
it where it is the next thing Carbon
events does is it'll simplify and reduce
code in your application so instead of
you having to have a lot of code when an
action comes
then to figure out where it was meant
for to figure out you know how do you
direct it somewhere the carbon events
themselves will figure out who the event
was meant for and direct it there so it
really simplifies your applications
Carbon events also allow you to
customize toolbox behaviors so again
generic patching was too large a
mechanism to do some of what it wanted
to do right it was a huge hammer where
you had to you know patch an entire
thing just to change the minor behavior
and in some cases it worked against our
goals of stability so what we've done
with carbon events is we've provided a
nice mechanism where you can intercept
events you can change them slightly
there's a lot more specific api's meant
for you to modify behaviors instead of
patching an entire subsystems so there's
a couple talks tomorrow about this and I
really encourage you to go and learn all
you can about carbon events now there's
a lot more talks than what I'm pointing
out I'm just pointing out some of the
highlights that I think you you may or
should attend the entire conference is
full of great carbon talks that you
should attend all right what does an
application look like how do we package
an application right you've built a
carbon application and instead of
packaging and how you have today is
there a way we can make it so it's it's
better for the user rights could make it
multilingual we of course wanted to run
on both Mac OS 9 and 10 and let's make
it very very simple for the user right
again we want to encourage simplicity so
multilingual
we've certainly found that would make a
lot of money by taking exactly the
software we've written and just selling
it in a different language right
localizing it to another language and
selling it most of the work you do is to
create your application it's not to do
the language specific part so what we
want is to support multiple multiple
localization for an application
extremely well of course the way to get
to there is Unicode the standard for
multi-language text and we have several
things in the system that will help with
that one is CF string so a technology
also in Coronation which deals with
Unicode strings we also have the
multilingual text editor so a carbon
text editor that deals with Unicode and
we really want to support single binary
multiple localizations what this means
is you can have a single application and
that application when run will run in
the language of the users preference so
that means when I launch an application
it'll run in English when my boss who
gave the last talk here runs an
application it runs in French so the
goal is to have a single application
that different people in the same office
can run and it runs in the language of
their choice so next of course you know
you want your applications to be able to
run on Mac OS 9 and 10 we want to have a
single package which itself you know one
SKU you can have one box in one SKU and
that itself will run in multiple
localizations lots of simplicity see
this is what met I met a morph started
you know looked like when it started
years and years ago right real simple
single icon in a single folder there's
no question where's the application I
look at it now that's full of so much
stuff right there's there's libraries
there's help files and plugins and
everything and when I look at this
folder I just see a bunch of trees you
know I can't see the forest I can't find
out where is the application I'm looking
to click the application I want to run
so that's not what we want we want
something very simple so we've solved
all three of those problems making
something multilingual
allowing it to run Mac OS 9 and 10 8 9
and 10 and making it very simple with
something called application packages so
application packages is where we take an
application is represented by a single
item in the
binder right so it's that one clickable
thing now behind that single item is an
entire folder hierarchy so there's lots
of stuff in there there's there's files
and data and all sorts of things but to
the user it's a single item right very
very simple and with technology called
CF bundle which helps to retrieve this
data and the resources now here's the
way I think of CF bundle CF bundle is
your high-end shoe salesperson now what
does that mean you know when you go and
you're shopping for shoes and you go
into you know a high-end store not some
place where you walk in there's two
boxes of shoes all over the place you
have to find your own shoes but you go
into a really fancy shoe place and you
sit down any point out you say I like
that shoe in that size and in this color
and it's very friendly person walks back
behind this door and you have no idea
what to do behind that door right you
don't know where they go to look they
have some structure back there where
they have racks and racks of shoes maybe
they have some way of knowing where to
look for the right shoe but they go and
they find that right shoe and they bring
it out and they put on your foot so CF
bundle does the same thing for you
except you know put the resource on your
foot you ask CF bundle ID like this
local is a I'd like this resource in
this language and CF bundle goes back
behind this folder hierarchy and it
finds that resource in that language and
it brings it back to you that whole
folder structure could be reorganized
and you don't care because CF bundle
knows how to find it now sometimes you
know that the shoe sales person might
come back and say we don't have it in
that color but we have it in another
color CF bundle can do the same thing
where it might come back and say I don't
have it in French and you can say I'd
like it in English and you'll go back
and find it and bring it back so see a
bundle will help find all these
resources for you
all right so application packaging
really allows us to have this very
simple but very powerful way of
compacting and putting an application
together but you know what that's a
really ugly icon and people do judge an
app a little bit by the icon you want a
really nice icon right it's it's the
face of your application when it's not
running and when it is it's the face in
the dock so we really want to encourage
you and carbon and that goes ten
supports and encourages you to work on
your applications and build really great
applications so what you should do is
use you know 32-bit color use
transparency and anti-alias your at your
icon and also make sure your icon looks
really good from small sizes you know
sixteen by sixteen all the way up to 128
by 128 because if the doc it's really
big it's 128 by 128 per icon and you
want your icons to look great so spend
some time making great icons so there's
a talk on Thursday to go over exactly
how do you get those icons into your
application all right aqua the simple
adoption of aqua is very very simple
right we've retained the Platinum
metrics which you requested and we said
great we can do that so it's really not
very hard for you to adopt the basics of
aqua but you don't want to have an
application which just adopts the basics
you want to have a great carbon
application which has a great aqua
interface so some behaviors like sheets
will take a little bit more time to
adopt but you should take that step to
adopt them you should make sure that
your menu layout abides by the new
Carbon menu layout guidelines and you
should be ready for the windows in your
applications to be intermixed with other
applications in fact this is a perfect
time for you to really polish your
application I mean as we come out with
aqua and Mac os10 there's going to be a
lot of emphasis by our users
and by reviewers on user interface right
we're concentrating on it and so it's a
great time for you excuse me
to really do a one over on your
application and make it look great so as
a couple talks especially more but
here's two of the more important talks
on aqua that you should attend right
after this they'll be an overview and
then on Wednesday you can learn exactly
how do you implement it okay so how do
you build your application how do you
build your UI right you decide you're
going to do a great aqua interface how
do you build this we've provided a tool
called interface builder which will help
you build this interface builder is a
WYSIWYG UI builder so you visually build
and you visually edit your user
interface it'll actually import your
current resource manager resources so
your data lifting the like and turn
those into an XML representation which
it uses the great thing about that is
XML uses Unicode so you can actually
have a tool process which will localize
your application just by editing these
XML text files so this is great
interface builder will help with the
Aqua guidelines so it'll help you lay
out your application correctly and it
also has a great concept of how Carbon
event should work and really builds that
right into the interface builder tool so
it'll help you to take advantage of
Carbon events and really speed up the
process of using carbon events in your
app this is a great talk on Thursday now
you should attend to learn about that
all right so you know what Carbon is
you're ready to do it the question is
you know exactly when do you do it so
the I metamorph guys they were looking
at two different scenarios the first one
was let's come out with one more version
of Mac OS 9 so one more Mac you know I
metamorph on Mac OS 9 take like the next
3-4 months to do it
and then come out with the version on
Mac os10 right then come out with a
carbon version which of course would go
on 9 and 10 the second scenario is to
say let's go straight for Mac OS 10
let's go straight for carbon and we're
going to get Mac twist 9 for free as
well now if you look at this the top one
certainly gets you a nap sooner but the
bottom one gets you the app sooner on 10
and never underestimate the value of
being somewhere first I think about it
this way
this was fraternity brother of mine back
in grad school he saw this new platform
sorta like Mac OS 10 he saw this new
platform and he thought it was a great
thing and he started building some apps
for this he built this one you know
pretty good app and he and a friend they
worked on this app they started adding
content to this app and he thought it
was great at some point he dropped out
of grad school to start a little company
to work just on this application on this
great new platform now a year or so
after that he had a lot of competition
there were a lot of other companies that
entered that same market segment but
because he was first he was the one
everyone went to so the platform of
course is the web and the application
the company is Yahoo so by being first
it wasn't necessarily the case that
Yahoo is the best but it was the place
everyone went when they went to the web
to find information
the same thing we true with Mac os10 and
carbon if your app is first to carbon
it'll be the app of a given genre of a
given breed of a given type it is the
aqua version which is the carbon version
of that application and that's the one
people are going to be looking for so
I'd really like to do is challenge all
of you to two things first I challenge
you to be beta with us so you saw you
know Steve said this morning we're going
to have a beta this summer and I
challenge you to come out with a beta of
your application at
same time that we come out with the beta
of Mac OS 10 because then our beta
testers will be testing your beta as
well right it's the best way to get the
most people testing it as early as
possible secondly I challenge you to be
GM with us so when we ship our final
version you ship your final version at
the same time and then people will see
that is the app the carbon app of that
type for that application so on Thursday
there's a talk about carbon live and Mac
OS or carbon on Mac OS 9 and 8 all right
so I've talked a lot about what
carbonization process was like what I'd
like to do now is bring up some
third-party developers some of you to
talk about the experience you guys had
with carbon and how far you come I like
to bring up John Wallace talk abouts now
up to date doctor thank you very much
all right John Wallace from power on
software and Bill Parr I think Apple
brought us up here to talk about this
look for a couple reasons one of which
is being a Mac software developer in
Italy one of the larger Mac software
developers but from Ohio I mean it I
think it's a hyoe software developer to
do this than all of you folks here and
also because now today in contact are a
pretty popular calendar and contact
management Macintosh they've been around
for a while and that there are quite a
challenge for us when we first looked
into it and it got easier and easier as
we as we went along let's talk about the
products now today in contact almost 3/4
of a million lines of C and Pascal code
let's also take a look at time frames
that's a lot of code it's a lot of code
but what we did was we first started
carbonizing are now at the date product
which is we're going to show here today
and when we carbonized now to date it
first started off as being Pascal we
went through week of a carbon kitchen
and got us along and I would say
by then at two weeks we were 90% of the
way done with the carbonization process
we also realize the tools were better in
sea so we converted the profit product
from Pascal to see about 300 thousand
lines of code so what we're going to see
right now is a product that's been
that's undergone about 2 plus weeks of
carbonization and probably about two
weeks of conversion from from Pascal to
C let's go take a look at it what we've
got is we've got the Calvert and contact
manager up it's all running under Mac
os10
we're able to make use of some of the
things that are going on in Mac OS 10
for example if you take a look at being
able to do aqua style banners and so
forth not too hard for us to take care
take advantage of all the appearance
things we haven't yet gone through the
process of actually building on all of
the the new buttons and the rest of
appearance but just getting up and
running took us about two weeks so what
do we learn from all this I would have
to assume that most of you are in the
same boat that we were in we didn't know
what to what to really expect least I
didn't built
we were lucky bill had done about
500,000 lines of carbonization before he
came to power on software and this is
this product was brand new damn what we
found was number one there will be a
couple weeks of just grunt work you've
got to go through and you've got to
modernize everything you've got to use
the accessor functions rather than
getting directly into a member variable
off of a off of a port like support dot
pork bits pounds you have to give us an
axe as a function to get through that so
it's number one number two is it was a
great opportunity for us to modernize
our code there are a lot of things that
we didn't do because there are multiple
multiple ways to do it do we use Mac TCP
not anymore Alex all ot and those kind
of things because of carbon it kind of
put us a position where we were now
modernizing and making our software
really aligns more with where Apple was
going I guess the third the third
message that we got from all this was
that this is real we've last year we got
we had the promise of car
and the promise that would be easy it is
easy and we have the promise that it's
going to be complete it is complete and
also from everything we're seeing this
week it's the future so I would highly
recommend everyone out there first thing
you do if you want an action step when
you get to get back from the conference
go home and carbonize it's not that
tough within a few weeks your app will
be up most of the way and I think if we
go for the future so I'd like to say you
know really a big thanks for Apple
because I think it's great well thank
you and one of the funnest things of my
job is every few days as I said I get to
see brand new apps coming to Mac OS 10
and over the last year it for me living
on it has just felt more and more real
now I'd like to bring up Mike Garcia
from quark to go through quark Express
[Applause]
okay I am I brought a few notes because
I'm not as polished as speakers some of
the other guys up here when I first
thought about what all's going to talk
about up here I thought about what would
I ask and I would ask somebody how
difficult is it to carbonize your app
and really the answer to that question
depends upon your app how much code do
you have that is non-standard non
recommended as you know Express has been
around for quite a long time are we run
out of one source code base for all of
our different versions one by two bytes
Mac Windows and we have some
non-standard things there because we
were doing things on OS 7 and 8 for
efficiency purposes we were mucking with
builds that we really shouldn't have
been messing with and now we can't
because of opacity I
the next thing you need to look at when
you're carbonizing are what are the
specific issues for your application or
Express we have some specific issues we
need to run Express on a less 8 so that
presents somewhat of a problem because
we need to support all of our old 4'o
extensions on 8 and if we're going to
support all of our old extensions we
have to support our API on 8 and if you
use our API you know we've got a lot of
working directories we expose the Qt
Global's there are some things that we
do there that we just cannot do with
carbon and so we had to branch our code
for for au extensions versus carbon
extensions the basic changes aren't that
difficult opacity it's a lot of it's a
lot of monkey work grunt works that's
what we call it and it took about 2
months for one engineer to do opacity on
Express because it's so huge it's it's
over 2 million lines of code about 20
libraries and that's not including
extensions so there's a lot of work for
us to do opacity and you just like they
said you go in in the morning and you
start it and you do it there are some
other issues that you will probably hit
depending on your app for us some of
those issues examples are working
directories we use working directories
all over the place and we give them to
extension developers so we have to
remove that because that's no longer
valid on carbon and that presents a
problem for our interface biz region
stuff we were doing things with the viz
region and clipping region for
efficiency purposes where we draw and we
can't do that anymore you can't just go
into the window pointer grass pointer
and mess with the fields in there there
are a few other areas where we just did
stuff like that and you can't do that
anymore and that's that's one of the
great things about OS 10 is it allows us
to go in and clean up some stuff that we
really should have been doing in the
first place
let me go ahead and show you Express
running on ten
okay
as you can see we're using a navigation
services here and here is a great little
document I'll show the alien that we do
to delete a box one of our Easter eggs
and it's gone so there we go and that
kind of illustrates leads us into some
of the great side effects great benefits
that we get from ten with that piece of
code there we can and displaying the
document we were able to turn off a lot
of excess code we had to deal with
double buffering OS gen does it for us
now we don't have to have this huge
chunk of code that does it
other great side effects we've been able
to reorder tech pieces of code that
we've wanted to do couldn't validate it
to product management and now we have to
so we can go ahead dig in and let's redo
the stuff the last thing I want to say
really is that going over to OS 10 has
been really fulfilling and gratifying
and it's really cool stuff when when you
start seeing your app go it's a lot of
fun and the guys that Apple has been
great and helping us the engineers are
very helpful and they'll do what they
whatever you ask them to do they'll
they'll try and implement it for you or
teach you how to do it and it's it's
been great and I suggest you all start
it now because it really is fun
all right last I'd like to bring up
Scott Thompson from Macromedia to show
us freehand these lights are so bright
it's really great for me to be here you
have no idea the carbonization of
freehand has been somewhat of a long
process
Apple actually asked us to carbonize
freehand back in 1998 to the original
WWDC we were trying to have it in for
the thursday keynote we missed it by
about two hours so I've actually
carbonized the freehand code base three
times since then believe it or not I did
it for eight I did it for nine twice so
I've had a lot of experience with this
this time luckily I had the help of a
great partner Kent Sorenson who's over
here taking photos helped me out a lot
so for us carbonization was and I
realized them that sound a lot like a
broken record because a lot of the stuff
the guys have already said it's
perfectly of for freehand as it will be
for your applications as well but for us
carbonization was largely a matter of
modernisation Steve said in his keynote
that you had to go through the
application and clean out clean out all
the crud freehand like quark is one of
these applications that's very big ours
is 1.2 million lines of code and we have
lots of stuff that was left over from
system 6 creating our own G worlds by
hand those sorts of things going to the
carbonization process really did let us
clean out a lot of crud and get going we
did have the big build up at the front
where we had to go through and deal with
the opaque data structures like they
said it's a matter of sitting down
steady guy with the compiler working
through a thousand two thousand three
thousand compilers giving them all
squared away but once you've got that
done you can get a few blink errors
maybe here and there and you'll be
running up on nine running on nine was a
great first step then we started trying
to play with running on ten running on
ten we had a few crashes we got to find
some of our right to nail bug those are
there those sorts of things but once you
work through a couple of small crashing
bugs we got a whole lot of functionality
really big part of our apps are working
all at once and that was really great
now we do have some areas that we need
to work on still the big one that I
don't have done is font support we have
to update from the old resource based
font manager to the new two-carbon font
manager API that's yet to be done I
haven't done a whole lot of printing yet
and you might think that for free hand
printing would be a big part but I know
that coming down the line we've got this
new print stuff coming along so rather
than rework we have now I decided to
just wait see if the new print stuff is
all about and do it that way
overall I think that the analogy that
says that carbonized your application is
roughly equivalent to the PowerPC
transition I really believe in that that
is actually true and it's been my
experience in the three or four times
that I've done freehand on carbon so why
don't we go ahead and see what freehand
looks like running I see up here on the
screen now I'm little disappointed in
this the notice is showing the 32 by 32
bit icon I actually have 128 by 128 I
con I don't know why it's not showing up
but that will give a shot so bring on
launches we hope all right pay no
attention to the man behind the curtain
go ahead and go through this dialog I
have to mention that this is a
technology demo it's not a product
announcement product marketing made me
say that so here it is
free hand is running we'll go ahead and
open the application go to our documents
freehand sample art bring up the lovely
fairy picture created by Dolores
Highsmith
you'll notice that we got a lot of the
aqua UI most of our aqwal UI came about
as adopting the appearance manager we
haven't done much beyond that appearance
manager is really great I urge you to
get a look at that if you haven't done
yet some of the great stuff that we get
running on tin besides the aqua UI the
double buffering is really nice you'll
notice as I move the panel around
there's absolutely no redraw of the
picture underneath it if you're an
artist and it takes you a long time to
redraw that picture if you have a really
complex document this will be an
incredible time-saver
beyond that we do have basic drawings
those sorts of things working you'll
notice that the drawing is really smooth
and lovely and stuff I added a minimal
amount of carbon events into the
tool tracking and that got me you know
it used to stutter a lot but now it
doesn't it's really great so moving to
carbon was actually quite easy and I
hope that you all get a chance to do it
okay thanks go thanks a lot guys so you
don't have to take my word as an Apple
employee and what we find is the
developers who have moved over to Carbon
have been really happy with it and we're
here for you
to help make you know to help the
process for all of you be as easy as
possible so what are the take-home
points first of all carbon apps will get
a bunch of user benefits right we're
going to make them more responsive more
robust carbon is the way to take your
classic app and get the aqua interface
you won't get some classic but you will
get it if you move it to aqua we really
believe in this and we live on it right
so the finder is a carbon application
quicktime player a bunch of other apps
their carbon applications so our system
is based on it and we tune it every day
because we live on the whole thing and
now is the time to carbonize there's a
lot more info you can get on the website
there's a carbon site this new tech club
site which is great it has this new
inside carbon which is you know inside
matte carbonized so if we can carve a
nice talk you can carbonize app and the
last one is interesting here we actually
have a list of consulting companies who
if you don't want to do it yourself you
can just throw out some cash and they'll
come and carbonize your application for
you so you can go ahead and check that
out David Wright is the technology
manager to talk to if you have questions
but the most important thing here is you
know tonight after you've partied with
the people you see here once a year and
you're drunk and you get back to your
hotel room and you want to impress your
boss pull out your power book install
dp4 on it and carbonize your application
thanks a lot
you